Dr. George Eng: In this patient, liquid chromatog- raphy–mass spectrometry of oral fluid was posi- tive for oxycodone, buprenorphine, benzoylecgo- nine, and cocaine. Urine is a more commonly tested specimen type than oral fluid, since it can easily be obtained noninvasively, with the addi- tional benefit that drugs of interest or their metabolites are often concentrated in it. How-
ever, urine testing for drugs of abuse is poten- tially complicated by deliberate manipulation of the specimen; adulteration, substitution, and dilution can all affect drug detection. Although an abnormal creatinine level, pH, or osmolality can suggest specimen manipulation, these mea- sures are not entirely sensitive or specific.12
In addition, enzyme immunoassays of urine specimens are associated with substantial rates of false positive results. The nonspecificity of enzyme immunoassays can lead to interpretive difficulties when there is a need to distinguish between an opiate-containing treatment regimen and illicit opioid use. Thus, many laboratories use a two-step testing algorithm that consists of initial screening with enzyme immunoassays followed by confirmation with liquid chroma- tography–mass spectrometry.13
The use of oral fluid for drug testing is also a noninvasive technique and may mitigate the potential for specimen manipulation, since col- lection of the specimen is observed directly. Testing of oral fluid may be particularly useful in clinical practices in which the prevalence of specimen adulteration is high.14 Such testing requires a higher degree of technical sophistica- tion, may result in a longer turnaround time, and may not be widely available in local prac- tice settings, but it is offered at reference labora- tories.
In this patient, the results of oral-fluid test- ing confirmed her report of oxycodone use and further revealed evidence of nonprescribed bu- prenorphine use. In addition, there was evidence of recent cocaine use, including detection of the parent molecule cocaine and the metabolite ben- zoylecgonine. There was no detection of 6-mono- acetylmorphine, a unique metabolite of heroin, or fentanyl, a common heroin adulterant; to- gether, these findings suggest that she was not using heroin.

Dr. Sarah E. Wakeman: When the patient presented to her primary care clinic for a follow-up visit, she described her history of opioid use and again requested injectable intramuscular naltrexone. In further discussion, it became clear that she preferred naltrexone because of the stigma related to buprenorphine, which she had heard from friends in recovery and observed in meet- ings of mutual-help organizations.15 Despite her initial preference for naltrexone, after she con- sidered her unsuccessful previous attempts to use naltrexone and her successful experience with nonprescribed buprenorphine, she agreed to initi- ate buprenorphine treatment.
This patient’s history of nonprescribed bupre- norphine use is consistent with studies that have shown that the three most commonly reported reasons for use of diverted (nonprescribed) bu- prenorphine are to prevent withdrawal, to main- tain abstinence, and to wean off opioids.16 In addition, the outcomes associated with prescribed buprenorphine treatment are better among those who report a history of nonprescribed buprenor- phine use than among those who have never taken buprenorphine.17
This patient was given instructions to start buprenorphine treatment at home, and close follow-up was arranged. Unobserved initiation of buprenorphine treatment, also called home induction, has been shown to be noninferior to in-office induction and offers more flexibility for patients and providers.18 At the patient’s next visit, she was connected to a recovery coach, who offered ongoing peer support. Although there is limited research regarding the effective- ness of recovery coaches in primary care, a qualitative study showed that patients with sub- stance use disorder perceive the coach to play an important role.19
Because the patient had ongoing concerns about her ability to continue treatment with bu- prenorphine, she was initially hesitant to take doses of buprenorphine and naloxone of more than 8 mg and 2 mg, respectively. After initia- tion of treatment, her toxicology screenings were consistently negative for opioids but she contin- ued to use cocaine intermittently. Eight months after initiation of treatment, she agreed to try increasing her doses of buprenorphine and nal- oxone to 12 mg and 3 mg, respectively, and her subsequent toxicology screens were negative for cocaine and all opioids. She is now in full, sustained remission. She is working full-time and parenting, and she continues to engage regularly with her medical team and recovery coach.
A Physician: Would you comment on how you
n engl j med 380;8 nejm.org February 21, 2019
The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org by Chelsea Joe on October 9, 2024. For personal use only.
No other uses without permission. Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
determine when to involve child protective ser- vices in situations in which a parent has sub- stance use disorder?
Dr. Wakeman: In Massachusetts, the criterion for mandatory reporting by a health care pro- vider is having reasonable cause to believe that a child younger than 18 years of age is suffering from abuse or neglect. I apply this standard to my patients regardless of whether they have a substance use disorder. The parent’s use of sub- stances does not necessarily mean that the child is suffering from abuse or neglect. If I become aware of a circumstance in which a child is suf- fering from abuse or neglect, then I will report my concern. If I think that it is necessary to re- port, I disclose to my patients that I am report- ing and why, so that they are aware, although this is not required in Massachusetts.
A Physician: At what point do you consider ta- pering treatment for opioid use disorder?
Dr. Wakeman: The decision to taper treatment should be initiated by the patient and should be based on the clinical scenario. Tapering therapy at less than 1 year typically results in recurrence of active opioid use. One of the longest observa- tional studies of buprenorphine for the treatment of prescription-opioid use disorder, in which pa- tients were followed for up to 42 months, showed that, although many patients elected to taper off buprenorphine during the follow-up period, the strongest predictor of abstinence at 42 months was continued buprenorphine treat- ment. Long-term treatment with buprenorphine has powerful benefits.20 However, if a patient feels strongly about trying to taper treatment and has had a stable condition for years, I sug- gest beginning a slow taper. If cravings develop, the dose should be increased again. I emphasize to patients that the goal is not to be off the medication but to have what they need to stay alive and healthy.