Case 6-2019: A 29-Year-Old Woman with Nausea, Vomiting, and Diarrhea

Dr. John A. Weems (Medicine): A 29-year-old woman was evaluated at a primary care clinic affiliated with this hospital because of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
The patient had been in her usual state of good health until the day before presentation, when nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, muscle aches, and a mild nonproductive cough developed suddenly. She had no sinus congestion, sore throat, shortness of breath, or abdominal pain. Over the telephone on the morning before presentation, she reported that her symptoms were severe and had pre- vented her from attending work. However, when she was evaluated later in the day by a provider at her primary care clinic, she reported that she had had spontaneous improvement in the morning and felt well on arrival at the clinic.
The patient had a history of exercise-induced asthma, gastroesophageal reflux disease, vitiligo, and genital warts. Two years before presentation, she had had negative screening tests for hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus. Fifteen months before presentation, she had received a diagnosis of influenza. During the months that followed, she had reported persistent bouts of fatigue and excessive sleepiness that had resulted in two motor vehicle accidents.
During the first event, which had occurred 13 months before presentation, the patient fell asleep while driving and her car crossed into the other lane, over the curb, and into an open space beside the road. She did not collide with any other vehicles or structures and had no trauma. During the second event, which had occurred 7 months before presentation, the patient collided with a turning vehicle. She did not lose consciousness, and the airbags did not deploy. After the crash, she had intermittent painful episodes of muscle spasms in her neck and low back that limited her range of motion. She was too fatigued to seek medical attention until the day after the collision.
The patient subsequently underwent evaluation at her primary care clinic. Her score on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale was 20, with scores ranging from 0 (low- normal daytime sleepiness) to 24 (excessive daytime sleepiness). She was referred for a for- mal sleep study. In addition, she received pre- scriptions for naproxen and cyclobenzaprine and completed outpatient physical therapy, and her muscle spasms diminished.
The patient had not undergone any surgical procedures. Medications included omeprazole, varenicline, naproxen, and cyclobenzaprine. Hydro- codone–acetaminophen had caused nausea. The patient was adopted, and her family history was unknown. She lived in an urban neighborhood in New England with her daughter, brother, and sister. She worked two full-time jobs, as a school counselor and a bartender. She smoked one pack of cigarettes weekly and had done so for 17 years, and she reportedly drank two to three alcoholic beverages weekly.
On physical examination, the temperature was 36.8°C, the pulse 106 beats per minute, and the blood pressure 117/91 mm Hg. The weight was 63.5 kg, the height 170 cm, and the body-mass index (the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters) 21.9. The patient appeared to be well. She had no diaphoresis or rashes, needle marks, or scars. The pupils were equal and reactive, the mucous membranes were moist, and the abdomen was soft, with no tender- ness on palpation. Results of liver-function tests were normal, and testing for urinary human chorionic gonadotropin was negative.
Just before the conclusion of the office visit, the patient reported a history of use of nonpre- scribed oxycodone–acetaminophen tablets and re- quested initiation of therapy with injectable intra- muscular naltrexone. Urine toxicology screening was ordered, and oral naltrexone was prescribed. A follow-up visit was planned for 6 days later, but the patient did not complete the urine toxi- cology screening or return to the clinic for her scheduled follow-up. However, 2 months later, she requested a referral for psychotherapy be- cause of increased symptoms of stress.
Four months after she requested the referral and 6 months after presentation, the patient was seen in the outpatient psychology clinic of this hospital, where additional history was obtained. She reported poor sleep, low energy, loss of in- terest in enjoyable activities, feelings of guilt, increased appetite, and a sensation that her legs were heavy and difficult to move. She also report-
ed intermittent episodes of heightened energy, pressured speech, racing thoughts, and excessive spending. She had no history of hallucinations or thoughts of harming herself or others.
At the psychology clinic, the patient report- ed that she had begun to use illicit drugs — in- cluding marijuana, oral opioids, cocaine, and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine — when she was in middle school. She had continued to use multiple substances for 5 years but had abruptly discontinued when she became preg- nant, at 19 years of age. She did not use illicit drugs for 8 years after the birth of her daughter but then resumed regular use of oral opioids 3 years before presentation, when she began to work at a bar where drugs were frequently avail- able. Since then, she had used escalating amounts of oral oxycodone to satisfy increased cravings and prevent withdrawal symptoms.
The patient reported that she used 120 mg of oxycodone per day and spent approximately $3000 per month on oxycodone. She had missed work because of withdrawal symptoms, and she worried that she would lose custody of her daughter because of her drug use. She had never been hospitalized for opioid use or had an over- dose. On several occasions, she had used non- prescribed buprenorphine, which had alleviated her withdrawal symptoms and cravings, but she had never tried buprenorphine treatment that had been prescribed by a health care provider. In addition, on several occasions, she had tried to initiate treatment with injectable intramuscular naltrexone but had been unable to abstain from opioid use long enough to receive the treatment. A plan was made for the patient to continue with outpatient cognitive behavioral therapy and mind- fulness exercises, and a follow-up visit with her primary care physician was scheduled.
One month later, the patient was seen by her primary care physician. Oral-fluid toxicology screening was positive for oxycodone, buprenor- phine, benzoylecgonine, and cocaine; testing of the saliva was negative for fentanyl. A diagnosis and management decisions were made.