Dr. Sarah V. Tsiaras: This previously healthy 41-year- old woman, who had no history of a medical condition and no traditional cardiac risk factors, presented with acute chest pain that radiated to her jaw and shoulders and was associated with dyspnea and diaphoresis. Symptoms occurred transiently 5 days before presentation, recurred after exertion 1 day before presentation, and became persistent on the day of presentation.
The differential diagnosis of chest pain in a
young woman is broad, but in this case, it can be narrowed quickly on the basis of the abnor- mal findings on electrocardiography, the hypo- kinesis in the left ventricular wall on echocar- diography, and the acute elevation in the troponin level, findings suggestive of myocardial injury. In the presence of these findings, noncardiac causes of pain that are common in young women (e.g., gastroesophageal ref lux disease, esophageal spasm, and musculoskeletal pain) are unlikely.
Myopericarditis
Could this patient’s chest pain be due to myo- pericarditis? Myocarditis or myopericarditis can result in focal or global myocardial inflamma- tion, necrosis, and dysfunction. Focal myocardi- tis is often suspected in patients who present with chest pain (which is sometimes associated with heart failure or a viral illness) and with evidence of an acute coronary syndrome on elec- trocardiography or laboratory testing and who do not have evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease on coronary angiography. The di- agnosis can be confirmed with the use of car- diac magnetic resonance imaging.1,2 A diagnosis of focal myocarditis would partially explain the patient’s chest pain, focal wall-motion abnor- mality, and elevated troponin level. However, the patient did not describe any antecedent viral ill- ness, which might lead us to suspect myocardi- tis. It is also notable that her troponin level was near normal on presentation and rose to 0.21 ng per deciliter 8 hours later. In patients with myo- carditis, the troponin level is typically elevated on presentation and stays the same or gradually decreases over a period of days.
Chest pain due to pericarditis is usually de- scribed as a sharp pleuritic pain that improves with leaning forward and worsens with lying down, and such pain was not present in this patient. In patients with pericarditis, electrocar- diography typically shows diffuse, concave ST- segment elevations and PR-segment depressions rather than the isolated ST-segment depressions that were seen in this case.
Pulmonary Embolism
Pulmonary embolism is often considered in pa- tients who present with acute chest pain. The Wells’ criteria help to establish whether the pre- test probability of pulmonary embolism is low, intermediate, or high.3 These criteria include an alternative diagnosis that is less likely than pul- monary embolism, clinical signs of deep-vein thrombosis, previous deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, a heart rate higher than 100 beats per minute, surgery or immobilization within the previous 4 weeks, hemoptysis, and active cancer. This patient does not meet any of these criteria. Moreover, patients with pulmo- nary embolism have pleuritic chest pain more often than substernal chest pain that radiates to the jaw and shoulders. Evidence of strain on the right side of the heart on electrocardiography (i.e., a S1Q3T3 pattern, with prominence of the S wave in lead I and a Q-wave and T-wave inver- sion in lead III) may be consistent with a diagno- sis of pulmonary embolism, but it is uncommon, and pulmonary embolism can be associated with many different abnormalities on electrocardiogra- phy, including sinus tachycardia, anterior T-wave inversions,4 new right bundle-branch block, and new atrial fibrillation. An elevated troponin level can be seen in patients with a large pulmo- nary embolism due to strain on the right side of the heart; in such patients, one might expect to see McConnell’s sign on echocardiography (i.e., hypokinesis at the base and middle of the right ventricle with relative sparing of the apex).5 I
would consider a diagnosis of pulmonary embo- lism to be unlikely in this patient.
Vasospasm
Vasospasm of the coronary arteries can cause chest pain, most often when the patient is at rest. Vasospasm typically occurs for a period of 5 to 10 minutes, but when it is prolonged, it can re- sult in myocardial injury. Chest pain related to vasospasm usually resolves with the administra- tion of sublingual nitroglycerin. Electrocardiog- raphy can show ST-segment depressions or ST- segment elevations that mimic those seen with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Patients who present with vasospasm often have other vasoactive diagnoses, such as migraine or Raynaud’s phenomenon. This patient has neither of these conditions and there is no mention that her chest pain was responsive to nitrates; there- fore, this diagnosis is unlikely.
Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy
Patients who have takotsubo cardiomyopathy, which is also known as stress-induced cardio- myopathy or the apical ballooning syndrome, often present with chest pain, changes on elec- trocardiography, and an elevated troponin level. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy most commonly oc- curs in postmenopausal women and is usually precipitated by an intense physical or emotional stressor. Electrocardiography most often shows ST-segment elevations or deep, symmetric T-wave inversions; echocardiography typically shows hy- perkinesis at the base of the left ventricle and akinesis at the apex. Patients who present with symptoms and signs of takotsubo cardiomyopa- thy often undergo urgent coronary angiography, and the diagnosis is made after coronary obstruc- tion is ruled out and ventriculography shows akinesis at the apex of the left ventricle. On the basis of the patient’s age, the absence of an in- citing event, and the presence of a small, focal wall-motion abnormality on echocardiography, takotsubo cardiomyopathy is an unlikely diagno- sis in this case.
Aortic Dissection
When this patient presented to the emergency department, aortic dissection was appropriately considered and CT angiography was performed. Although the patient had not previously received a diagnosis of hypertension, which is seen in most patients with aortic dissection, she had a family history of hypermobile Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. Hypermobility is seen with several types of the Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, including the hyper- mobile, classical, and vascular types.6 Vascular complications, such as aortic dissection, are com- mon only with the vascular type (but have been reported with other types), and aortic-root dila- tation can be seen with both the classical type and the hypermobile type.7,8 Unless the patient had an aortic dissection with involvement of the coronary arteries, this diagnosis would not ex- plain the dynamic changes on electrocardiogra- phy or elevated troponin level seen in this case.
Atherosclerotic Coronary Artery Disease
Atherosclerotic coronary artery disease should be considered in any patient who meets diagnos- tic criteria for acute myocardial infarction, includ- ing symptoms of ischemia, an acute elevation in the troponin level, and new ischemic changes on electrocardiography. However, I believe this diagnosis is unlikely in this patient. She has no traditional risk factors for atherosclerosis, and patients who present with premature coronary artery disease typically have a strong family his- tory of the disease, a history of tobacco use, or a markedly elevated level of low-density–lipoprotein cholesterol.
Spontaneous Coronary-Artery Dissection
Several features of this case arouse suspicion for spontaneous coronary-artery dissection, which accounts for up to 30% of acute coronary syn- dromes that occur in women younger than 50 years of age.9 In this patient, clinical features that are consistent with this diagnosis include the absence of traditional cardiac risk factors, a history of recent miscarriage, a family history of the Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, and hyperextensible digits on physical examination. Certain hormonal influences are thought to increase the risk of spontaneous coronary-artery dissection, because many patients receive the diagnosis during either late pregnancy or the early postpartum period. Although this patient was not pregnant or in the postpartum period, she had had a miscarriage 1 month before presentation, and the increased progesterone levels during that pregnancy could have led to increased fragility of the arterial
media. In addition, her family history of hyper- mobility, spontaneous pneumothorax, and cere- bral aneurysm raises the question of whether she and her family carry a genetic mutation that increases the risk of a coronary-artery dissection. In one series of patients with spontaneous coro- nary-artery dissection, nearly one third had hy- permobility on presentation.10 Risk factors for spontaneous coronary-artery dissection that this patient did not have include intense physical activity, emotional stress, fibromuscular dyspla- sia, and systemic inflammatory conditions.
In patients who are hemodynamically stable and have improving or resolved chest pain, the diagnosis of spontaneous coronary-artery dis- section can be made with the use of cardiac CT angiography. In patients with unremitting chest pain or in those who have nondiagnostic results on cardiac CT angiography, invasive coronary angiography is often performed, but there is a risk that introduction of the catheter into the coronary artery will propagate the dissection. Be- cause this patient had ongoing chest pain, I would recommend invasive coronary angiography. Given the distribution of the wall-motion abnormali- ties on echocardiography, I suspect that the pa- tient had a spontaneous dissection in the left circumflex coronary artery.
Dr. David M. Dudzinski (Cardiology): Dr. Vidula, what was your impression when you evaluated this patient?
Dr. Vidula: Our differential diagnosis included spontaneous coronary-artery dissection, acute myo- cardial infarction due to plaque rupture, aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, and vasospasm. Given her young age, the absence of atherosclerotic risk factors, and the family his- tory of the Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, we thought that the most likely diagnosis was spontaneous coronary-artery dissection. To confirm this diag- nosis, we performed coronary angiography.