Case 39-2017: A 41-Year-Old Woman with Recurrent Chest Pain

Dr. Mahesh K. Vidula (Medicine): A 41-year-old woman presented to this hospital with chest pain.
Approximately 1 year before presentation, the patient had had transient tight- ness in the chest and shoulder on the left side that had prompted a referral to outpatient physical therapy. Five days before presentation, while the patient was packing for a flight to Boston, acute substernal chest pain developed; the pain radiated to the jaw and shoulders and was accompanied by dyspnea and by a feel- ing of needing to belch. These symptoms lasted 1 hour and then spontaneously resolved, and she attributed them to fatigue.
On the day before presentation, substernal chest pain with radiation to the jaw and shoulders recurred after the patient had been walking, and the pain gradually resolved after a few hours. Before dinner on the evening of presentation, the pain recurred and was associated with light-headedness. The patient attended dinner but had persistent pain, along with dyspnea. She presented to the emergency de- partment of this hospital.
On physical examination, the patient was diaphoretic. The temperature was 36.6°C, the heart rate 68 beats per minute, the blood pressure 143/87 mm Hg in both arms, the respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 100% while she was breathing ambient air. She did not have carotid bruits or jugular venous distention, nor did she have cardiac murmur, rub, or gallop on auscultation. Her digits were hyperextensible. The rest of the examination was normal. Laboratory test results are shown in Table 1.
The patient had no history of dysrhythmia, heart-failure symptoms, trauma, or constitutional, respiratory, gastrointestinal, or neurologic symptoms. She had un- dergone a laparoscopy for an ovarian cyst, and she had had a miscarriage 1 month before this evaluation. She took no medications. Penicillin and sulfa drugs caused urticaria. She exercised four times weekly with an elliptical machine and walked her dog daily. She did not smoke tobacco or use illicit drugs; she consumed two alcoholic beverages per week. She had a healthy 11-year-old daughter. Her father had a history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and an embolic stroke. Her mother, brother, and sister had hyper- mobile Ehlers–Danlos syndrome: her mother had joint hypermobility and had received the diagno- sis during her first pregnancy because of recur- rent hip subluxations; her brother had joint hyper- mobility and spontaneous pneumothorax and bruised easily; and her sister had joint hypermo- bility and bruised easily. A maternal second cousin had died at 51 years of age from a cere- bral aneurysm. Electrocardiography and cardiac imaging studies were performed.
Dr. Lucy M. Safi: Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm and submillimeter down- sloping ST-segment depressions in leads V3, V4,
and V5 (Fig. 1). The depressions had decreased in magnitude on electrocardiography performed 3 hours later and had fully resolved on electrocar- diography performed 8 hours after presentation.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed over- all normal left ventricular and right ventricular systolic function. There was a small, focal area of hypokinesis in the left ventricular inferolateral wall (see Videos 1 and 2, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). There was no clinically significant valvular stenosis, regurgita- tion, or pericardial effusion. Although there was increased mobility of the interatrial septum, a color Doppler study showed no evidence of a patent foramen ovale.
Dr. Brian B. Ghoshhajra: Posteroanterior and lateral chest radiography showed no abnormali-ties. Computed tomographic (CT) angiography of the chest was performed after the administra- tion of intravenous contrast material with the use of a standard aortic-dissection protocol. There was no evidence of aortic dissection or proximal pulmonary embolism. The aorta appeared nor- mal, with a preserved sinotubular junction, and the ascending aorta and descending aorta each had a normal diameter. There were no other obvious cardiovascular abnormalities, such as aortic or coronary atherosclerosis, cardiomegaly, or pulmonary edema.
Dr. Vidula: Aspirin, atorvastatin, and intrave- nous heparin were administered. Diagnostic tests were performed, and a diagnosis was made.