Dr.DhruvS.Kazi:This73-year-oldmanwithahis- tory of coronary, valvular, and arrhythmic heart disease presented with hypoxemic respiratory failure and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates dur- ing the Covid-19 pandemic. His presentation is also notable for hypotension, ST-segment abnor- malities, and biventricular dysfunction.
Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure with Pulmonary Infiltrates
The differential diagnosis of this patient’s pul- monary findings includes cardiogenic pulmonary edema, multifocal pneumonia, and acute respi- ratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Prosthetic- valve dysfunction and endocarditis can cause pulmonary edema, but there were no examina- tion findings suggestive of prosthetic aortic ste- nosis or aortic regurgitation. Furthermore, the limited echocardiographic views that were avail- able suggested that the prosthesis was function- ing normally. Despite the presence of ventricular dysfunction and an elevated N-terminal pro– B-type natriuretic peptide level, cardiogenic pul- monary edema is an unlikely diagnosis in this patient, given the low central venous pressure and the absence of physical examination find- ings to support congestion.
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Although this patient has a history of clinically significant cardiac disease, multifocal pneumo- nia and ARDS are the likely causes of his hypox- emic respiratory failure. The diagnosis of ARDS is made if a patient has sudden onset (or pro- gression) of symptoms within 1 week after a known clinical insult, bilateral pulmonary opac- ities on chest imaging, respiratory failure that is not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload, and moderate-to-severe impairment of oxygenation1; this patient met all four criteria. ARDS can be precipitated by various triggers, including infection, aspiration, trauma, transfu- sion-related lung injury, the use of illicit drugs, or acute pancreatitis.2 This patient had reported cough and fever in the week preceding the onset of respiratory failure, raising concern for viral or bacterial pneumonia. Although he presented while there was still substantial influenza activ- ity in the area, his syndrome progressed rapidly while he was receiving oseltamivir. Because of the patient’s presentation during the initial in- crease in SARS-CoV-2 infections in Massachu- setts and the possibility of his occupational ex- posure to asymptomatic but infected patients, Covid-19 is the leading diagnosis in this case.3 The patient’s age, male sex, and history of car- diovascular disease, diabetes, and hypertension all increase his risk of having a severe form of SARS-CoV-2 infection.4
Cardiac Abnormalities
This patient had an elevated troponin T level suggestive of myocardial injury, which is com- mon among critically ill patients with SARS- CoV-2 infection. In a retrospective single-center cohort study involving 416 hospitalized patients with Covid-19 in Wuhan, China,5 cardiac injury, defined by a troponin T level above the 99th percentile (upper limit of the reference range), was present in 19.7% of the patients. This pa- tient’s ST-segment elevations in leads I and aVL arouse concern about an ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (STEMI) in the lateral wall. However, the presence of subtle PR-segment de- flections on the electrocardiogram, the finding of biventricular systolic dysfunction, and the high levels of inflammatory markers may sug- gest myopericarditis. The fact that the left ven- tricle was not dilated suggests that the cardio- myopathic process is most likely acute.
Other possible causes of this patient’s find- ings on electrocardiography include ischemia (due to either sudden rupture of an atheroscle- rotic plaque in an epicardial coronary vessel or a supply–demand mismatch resulting from hypox- emia and sepsis), cytokine-mediated myocardial injury in the context of a hyperinflammatory state, or stress-induced cardiomyopathy (where- by an emotional or physical stressor produces transient ventricular systolic dysfunction).6,7 It is important to rule out all other causes of myocar- dial dysfunction before making a diagnosis of stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Of note, this pa- tient’s normal central venous oxygen saturation and low central venous pressure suggest that the development of hypotension is probably due to the use of sedative and paralytic medications and to distributive shock in the context of infection, rather than a cardiogenic cause. To determine the next steps in the evaluation of this patient, urgent decision making about the need for coro- nary angiography is warranted, with attention given to the possible infectious risks associated with performing this procedure in a patient who most likely has SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Coronary Angiography
Dr. Duane S. Pinto: Coronary angiography can be used to determine whether revascularization is indicated, but there are additional considerations in a critically ill patient with confirmed or sus- pected Covid-19. First, it is important for clini- cians to maintain a high index of suspicion for diseases such as myopericarditis or stress-induced cardiomyopathy that can produce ST-segment elevation. Second, even when STEMI is suspect- ed, physicians must weigh the potential benefit of emergency revascularization against the risks of invasive procedures in a patient with a com- peting critical illness such as Covid-19.
In patients with Covid-19 who have suspected STEMI, the reperfusion strategy should be tailored to the individual patient. During the Covid-19 outbreak in Hong Kong, the median time from the onset of symptoms to presentation increased from approximately 80 minutes to 320 minutes among patients with STEMI, a finding that im- plied that patients were avoiding the hospital, which possibly resulted in a reduced amount of myocardium that could be salvaged.8 Medical management, with avoidance of procedural and bleeding risks, may be acceptable in patients with severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, particularly if the patient’s condition is stable and the infarc- tion is small.
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention is preferred over fibrinolysis if a substantial amount of myocardium can be salvaged and resources can be mobilized rapidly. If prolonged delays are anticipated because resources have been exhaust- ed and the catheterization laboratory is unavail- able, fibrinolytic therapy may become necessary.9,10
It is important to consider that the prevalence of myopericarditis is probably higher among patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection than in the general population. Given the increased preva- lence of STEMI mimics, any risk of intracranial hemorrhage with fibrinolysis is unnecessary, even a risk as small as approximately 1%. Routine fibrinolysis is also unlikely to reduce resource utilization, staff exposure, or the length of stay and often necessitates the use of scarce ICU re- sources. Coronary angiography in combination with strategies to avoid nosocomial infection is the preferred option for ambiguous cases and may also be warranted in situations in which attempted fibrinolysis has failed.
Echocardiography can be useful in identify- ing wall motion abnormalities that differentiate myopericarditis from coronary occlusion. In this patient, given that the echocardiogram showed global biventricular systolic dysfunction, suspi- cion of an acute occlusion of an epicardial coro- nary artery is low relative to possible myoperi- carditis, and it is appropriate to defer emergency coronary angiography.
Myopericarditis
Dr. Kazi: Several reported cases of possible myo- pericarditis among patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection have been published.11-14 Some of these patients presented with localized ST-segment elevations on electrocardiography but were sub- sequently noted to have no evidence of obstruc- tive coronary disease on coronary angiography. One patient, a previously healthy 53-year-old
woman who presented with a 1-week history of dyspnea and subjective fever, was noted to have diffuse ST-segment elevations, severe left ventric- ular dysfunction, and a small pericardial effusion, as well as cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings that were reportedly diagnostic of acute myopericarditis.11 In another patient, cardiac tamponade developed from a pericardial effusion that was attributed to SARS-CoV-2 in- fection.15 Although patients in whom myocardial injury develops also typically have moderate-to- severe lung involvement, cases with isolated cardiac involvement have also been reported.11,15 Most case reports have suggested that if a pa- tient survives the initial infection, there is recov- ery of myocardial function in the subsequent weeks, although acute and severe cardiac dete- rioration after pulmonary recovery have been reported. Although we are still learning about the findings of myopericarditis associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection that can be observed on electrocardiography, other causes of myopericar- ditis and cardiac irritation are known to produce a range of changes on electrocardiography, in- cluding ST-segment elevations that can mimic a STEMI.16,17
Given the constellation of clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings, the most likely diagnosis in this patient is myopericarditis due to infection with SARS-CoV-2.

