Case 18-2020: A 73-Year-Old Man with Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure and Cardiac Dysfunction

Dr. Lila M. Martin: A 73-year-old man was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) of an academic health center in Boston for acute hypoxemic respiratory failure in March 2020, during the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19), the disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
The patient had been in his usual state of health until 6 days before this trans- fer, when a dry cough, fever, and worsening fatigue developed. Two days later, his symptoms had not resolved, and he presented to the emergency department at a local hospital. The temperature was 38.8°C, the blood pressure 94/62 mm Hg, the heart rate 91 beats per minute, the respiratory rate 12 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 97% while he was breathing ambient air. On examination, he ap- peared well, and the lung sounds were clear. The white-cell count was 5600 per microliter (reference range, 4800 to 10,500); 56% of the cells were neutrophils and 33% were lymphocytes. A nasopharyngeal swab was submitted to the Massachu- setts State Laboratory for nucleic acid testing for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Tests for in- fluenza A and B viruses and respiratory syncytial virus were not performed owing to a statewide shortage of nasopharyngeal swabs.
Dr. Diana Litmanovich: Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, performed with- out the administration of intravenous contrast material, revealed small (1 to 1.5 cm in diameter), rounded central and peripheral ground-glass opacities in both lungs (Fig. 1A).
Dr. Martin: Oseltamivir was prescribed for the empirical treatment of influenza, and the patient was discharged from the emergency department and instructed to self-quarantine at home. During the next 4 days, his symptoms persisted; when dyspnea developed, he contacted his primary care physician and was referred back to the emergency department at the local hospital. The temperature was 38.6°C, the blood pressure 158/91 mm Hg, the heart rate 108 beats per minute, the respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 90% while he was breathing ambient air. He appeared fatigued, tachypneic, and distressed; auscultation of the lungs re- vealed decreased breath sounds bilaterally. The trachea was intubated, and mechanical ventila- tion was initiated. Intravenous propofol, cisa- tracurium, cefepime, and norepinephrine were administered, and the patient was transferred by helicopter to an academic health center in
Boston for further evaluation and management of symptoms.
On the patient’s arrival at the academic health center, his family was available to provide infor- mation regarding medical history, surgical history, and a recent review of systems by telephone. The review of systems was negative for conjunctivitis, nasal congestion, sinusitis, anosmia, abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, light-headedness, dizzi- ness, chest pain, and edema. The patient’s status with respect to influenza and pneumococcal vac- cination was unknown. His medical history was notable for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, and obstructive sleep apnea, for which nightly continuous positive airway pressure had been prescribed. He had undergone surgical aortic-valve replacement for severe symptomatic aortic stenosis 1 year earlier; there had been no evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease on preoperative angiography. Radiofrequency ab- lation for recurrent atrial flutter had been per- formed 2 years earlier, and he had undergone right shoulder arthroplasty. Medications included metformin, insulin lispro, atenolol, losartan, and apixaban. Multiple statin medications had previously caused myalgia with elevated creatine kinase levels.
The patient was a health care worker but had no known sick contacts. No family members were ill. He had not traveled recently or had other en- vironmental exposures. He did not use tobacco, drink alcohol, or use illicit substances. His fam- ily history was notable for coronary artery dis- ease in multiple relatives; there was no history of pulmonary disease.
The patient was admitted to a dedicated Covid-19 ICU at the academic health center. The temperature was 38.9°C, the blood pressure 100/60 mm Hg while he was receiving intrave- nous norepinephrine, the heart rate 112 beats per minute, the respiratory rate 25 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 95% while he was receiving oxygen through a mechanical ven- tilator (positive end-expiratory pressure, 5 cm of water; tidal volume, 410 ml; fraction of inspired oxygen, 1.0). The patient was sedated. There was no jugular venous distention. Auscultation of the chest revealed a tachycardic rhythm with no murmur and coarse breath sounds with rhonchi in both lungs. His arms and legs were cool and clammy. The remainder of the examination was normal.

Catheters were placed in the right internal jugular vein and the left radial artery. The central venous pressure was 4 mm Hg. The partial- thromboplastin time and blood levels of phos- phorus and magnesium were normal; other labo- ratory test results are shown in Table 1. A blood sample was obtained for culture, and a nasopha- ryngeal swab was obtained for nucleic acid test- ing for the detection of community-acquired re- spiratory pathogens and SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
Dr. Litmanovich: An anteroposterior radiograph of the chest (Fig. 1B) showed extensive confluent central and peripheral parenchymal opacities in both lungs. The central venous catheter in the right internal jugular vein was in an appropriate position.
Dr. Martin: An electrocardiogram (Fig. 2A) showed normal sinus rhythm with left atrial abnormality, a borderline prolonged PR interval, ST-segment depressions of 1 mm in the inferior leads, ST-segment elevations of 1 mm in leads I and aVL, PR-segment deviations (a depression in lead II and an elevation in lead aVR), and a cor- rected QT (QTc) interval of 425 msec. A trans- thoracic echocardiogram showed severe global left ventricular hypokinesis, as well as dysfunc- tion of the right ventricular free wall and the apex (see Videos 1 and 2, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). These findings were new relative to an echocardiogram that had been obtained 2 months earlier as part of rou- tine surveillance after aortic-valve replacement, that had shown normal biventricular function. The size of the left ventricular chamber was normal. There was mild symmetric thickening of the left ventricular wall (12 mm; normal thickness, ≤11), a finding that was unchanged from the previous echocardiogram. No evidence of pericardial effusion was observed, and the bioprosthetic aortic valve was well seated and appeared to be functioning normally.
The patient received intravenous propofol, fentanyl, midazolam, and cisatracurium, as well as empirical intravenous vancomycin, cefepime, and doxycycline. Treatment with apixaban was discontinued, and intravenous heparin was initi- ated. Hydroxychloroquine was administered en- terally.
Additional management decisions were made.