Dr. Janet E. Murphy: I am aware of the diagnosis in this case. During the last trimester of pregnancy, this patient received a diagnosis of poorly differ- entiated adenocarcinoma with widespread in- volvement of the liver and lymph nodes. The first step in the development of an evidence-based treatment plan is to determine the site of origin of the cancer. Primary adenocarcinoma of the liver, which is typically biliary in origin, is rare. Cancer with metastasis to the liver is far more common, accounting for 95% of cases of cancer with liver involvement in the Western hemisphere.
Among women of all ages, cancer most com- monly arises in the breast, lung, or colon.1 Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma can arise in all three of these sites. This patient was pregnant; does pregnancy alter the differential diagnosis? The most common cancers to occur during preg- nancy are melanoma and breast, cervical, and hematologic cancers, which together account for 70% of all cases. Of these cancers, only breast cancer is typically adenocarcinoma.2 In addition, the patient had widespread liver involvement. Overall, colorectal cancer is the most common cause of metastasis to the liver, owing to portal venous drainage to the liver from the large bowel. However, among women younger than 50 years of age, breast cancer is the most common cause.3 Lung, gastric, and pancreatic cancers can also metastasize to the liver and should be consid- ered in this case.
To determine the site of origin of the cancer in this patient, I would recommend obtaining a detailed family history, performing an immuno- histochemical analysis of the liver-biopsy spec- imen, and then pursuing further diagnostic testing according to the index of suspicion. Such testing may include colonoscopy, diagnostic mammography, CT of the chest, and esophago- gastroduodenoscopy.
Dr. Dennis Sgroi (Pathology): Dr. Riley, what was your initial impression when you evaluated this patient?

Dr. Laura E. Riley: When I first met this patient, she was quite sick and in great pain. She had left another hospital in the middle of the night be- cause she and her husband had thought that her pain was undertreated and that their goals of care were not appreciated. Although the patient had been advised to deliver the baby and then to undergo the remainder of evaluation and treat- ment, she and her husband were focused on identifying the primary cancer, understanding the treatment options, and obtaining adequate pain relief. Therefore, our first few days with them were spent developing a trusting relation- ship. The gastroenterology team reviewed the previously obtained abdominal CT scan, which showed thickening of the sigmoid colon with adjacent lymphadenopathy. Esophagoduodenos- copy and colonoscopy were performed and re- vealed a fungating and partially obstructing mass, measuring 5.0 cm in diameter, in the sigmoid colon. A biopsy of the mass was performed.