Case 32-2018: A 36-Year-Old Pregnant Woman with Newly Diagnosed Adenocarcinoma

Dr. Malavika Prabhu (Obstetrics and Gynecology): A 36-year-old pregnant woman was evaluated at this hospital at 33 weeks of gestation because of newly diagnosed adenocarcinoma.
Seven months before this admission, when the patient was at her initial routine prenatal visit, transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a normal gestational sac and embryo. Thereafter, prenatal follow-up was uneventful, although she had abnor- mal results on a 1-hour glucose tolerance test at 27 weeks of gestation.
One week before the current evaluation, at 32 weeks of gestation, the patient had 3 days of nonradiating, severe pain in the lower back that she rated at 10 on a scale of 0 to 10, with 10 indicating the most severe pain. The pain started in the epigastric region and then migrated to the right upper quadrant and lower back. It was accompanied by severe nausea and an inability to eat any food or drink liquid without vomiting. She had night sweats and difficulty sleeping because of back pain. Four days after the pain began, the patient was admitted to the obstet- rics service of another hospital.
On examination, the temperature was 36.6°C, the heart rate 96 beats per minute, the blood pressure 105/68 mm Hg, and the oxygen saturation 97% while the patient was breathing ambient air. She appeared to be uncomfortable. There was tenderness in the right upper quadrant, and the gravid uterus was soft. There was no costovertebral tenderness. The remainder of the examination was nor- mal. The amylase and lipase levels and the white-cell differential count were normal; additional laboratory test results are shown in Table 1.
Fetal heart tones were noted on Doppler ultrasonography, and the measure- ments of the fetus on ultrasonography were appropriate for gestational age. The fetal biophysical profile (breathing motion, movement, tone, and amniotic-fluid volume) was reportedly normal.
Dr. Kimberly Shampain: On renal ultrasonography, the kidneys and bladder appeared normal but the liver was incidentally noted to be diffusely heterogeneous and nodular and to contain numerous masses. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), performed withouttheintravenousadministrationofcontrast material, revealed multiple lesions in the liver that were mildly hyperintense on T2-weighted images and hypointense on T1-weighted images; the largest lesion measured 7.4 cm by 3.9 cm, and some lesions had central necrosis (Fig. 1A).
Dr. Prabhu: Allopurinol, an injection of beta- methasone acetate–betamethasone sodium phos- phate, and intravenous f luids were administered. One day after admission to the first hospital, the patient was transferred to the obstetrics service of a second hospital for further evaluation. Addi- tional imaging studies were obtained.
Dr. Shampain: Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, performed after the intravenous administration of contrast mate- rial, revealed numerous hypoattenuating hepatic lesions, some with well-defined borders and others with ill-defined, irregular borders; the largest measured 8.2 cm in diameter. Multiple enlarged periaortic and portocaval lymph nodes were present (Fig. 1B).
Dr. Prabhu: Additional laboratory test results are shown in Table 1. A percutaneous liver biopsy was performed, and examination of the biopsy spec- imen revealed evidence suggestive of metastatic adenocarcinoma. Plans for chemotherapy were discussed, as was early fetal delivery. One week after admission to the second hospital, the pa- tient left against medical advice. She presented to her obstetrician’s office the next day, at 33 weeks of gestation, and then she was transferred to the obstetrics service of this hospital.
On evaluation at this hospital, the patient reported ongoing severe back pain. She had no vaginal bleeding or contractions. The temperature was 36.2°C, the blood pressure 114/74 mm Hg, and the oxygen saturation 97% while she was breathing ambient air. There was no abdominal tenderness, and fetal movement was detectable in the gravid uterus. The fetal heart rate was 125 beats per minute, with moderate variability and accelerations and without decelerations.
Additional history was obtained. Four years earlier, the patient had had a spontaneous abor- tion at 10 weeks of gestation. Medications in- cluded a prenatal vitamin with ferrous sulfate and folate. The patient had no known allergies. She was originally from Asia and lived in a suburb of Boston. She was married and was a college pro-
fessor. She did not smoke tobacco, drink alco- hol, or use any illicit substances. Her father had diabetes mellitus and hypertension, and her maternal grandfather had cancer, the details of which were unknown to the patient.
Management decisions were made.
